Thanks to some helpful comments, I was told that the sleeping and eating routine I've previously mentioned is mainly followed in the summer. Generally speaking, people tend to eat dinner when it’s dark outside. I haven’t been to Spain during the wintertime so I can't speak firsthand, but apparently it’s common to have supper as early as 21:00 when days are short.
 Hungrily, but not as groggy, I hobbled to Plaza Mayor and devoured a bocadillo de calamares (fried squid in a roll) from Casa Rua, a small restaurant on the Northwest side of the square. The joint is filled with locals, shocking for such a tourist-infested area. The sandwich is so delicious. The roll in and of itself is of note, as it is the closest I’ve had to a classic Amoroso's outside of Philadelphia. 
 After a few beers in the plaza, I went to the gentrifying (and mostly gay) neighborhood of Chueca to try out a restaurant called Tienda de Vinos ("Wine Store"). Here, they cover the windows with sheets, habr no apparent door, and could easily be mistaken for a house; not the type of place that a gringo like me would venture on a whim. I did my research, though. It turns out the place was crowded. And guess who entered just before me? Javier Bardem! We both turned away. Where’s Oscar and girlfriend now, punk? If this were in Manhattan, I'm sure a hidden table would appear in a nook, like magic. I shouldn't have been in awe that such a huge movie star would be refused a table; the restaurant's first owner was a hardcore communist. The dining room’s surrounded by wooden benches and communal tables. 
 
 Disappointed, I went two metro stops south to Sol and tried a tapas crawl. By "tried", I mean I was stuffed from my first stop, so it was just a single-tapas-crawl. My only stop was at Oreja del Oro (“Ears of Gold”). They specialize in pig's ears a la plancha, of all things! The portion was much larger than expected, but amazing. The ears were chopped into bite-sized chunks that were crispy on the outside, chewy on the inside, and laced with super awesome gelatin throughout (due to the ears' high collagen content). Awesome. I wanted to try the Mollejas (sweetbread from Lamb), but I ate too much already. 
 
 Thanks to jet lag, I woke up somewhat later than I had anticipated and just missed the 09:20 train to Toledo. So I caught the 10:20 train instead. 
 In what remains of the morning, I repeated the usual touristesque duties that I had already done during my first visit: synagogues, the cathedral, and other places. I also rediscovered an amazing lace shop that I found a few years back.
